## ElfQuest: Review and Themes

Many years ago, during the playtesting stage of what would become the Mongoose version of RuneQuest, there was an early discussion on the purpose of the game. Steve Perrin had just joined the group and the discussion when I referred that RuneQuest first edition (1978, p8) contained description that was concise (like most of that rulebook): "The title of the game, RUNEQUEST, describes the goal... Acquiring a Rune by joining such a cult is the goal of the game, for only in gathering a Rune may a character take the next step, up to the ranks of Hero, and perhaps Superhero". This lead to a further discussion about other games and their purpose and Steve Perrin made (again, precise and pithy) comment that ElfQuest was about Elves questing for Elves. He was, of course, speaking with some authority as the co-author of both RuneQuest and author of the ElfQuest RPG (with additional material by Jeff Okamoto, Greg Stafford, and Kenneth Brown).

It is in the spirit of that line that the following article on themes and narratives within the ElfQuest RPG is written. It is also written with recognition that ElfQuest was very recently noted by Sean Hollister, senior editor of The Verge, as the primary book that changed his life (heck, RuneQuest is only number 2 on my list). With an evocative title, author and Electric Lit contributor Madeline Ffitch describes "How a Comic Book About Feral Elves Got Me Through Middle School". Their article (https://electricliterature.com/how-a-comic-book-about-feral-elves-got-me-through-middle-school/) is well worth a read in the context of this article, as it does a more thorough and insightful contribution to the themes than I could ever aspire to. Still, it drives the thematic considerations in this article.

What is ElfQuest, anyway? In the primary sense in popular culture, it is a comic book series written by Wendy and Richard Pini which started in 1978. The story is set in a Earth-like world called "Abode", but also is known as the descriptive "The World of Two Moons". The world is inhabited by prehistoric Earthly creatures, initially with a European and North American focus, albeit with Elven "primitive" names. Thus one will find bear, bison, deer, elk, "long tooth" (sabre-toothed tigers), "mad horn" (wooly rhinocerous), "no hump" (horse), "serpent nose" (mammoth), "shell back" (glyptodont), "wave dancer" (dolphin), and wolves. There are also dinosaur-era creatures, e.g.,. "sword foot", as well as gigantic species (e.g., giant spiders, giant leeches).

Among the sapient species there are three alien species introduced by an artifact falling from the sky; the elves, trolls, and the winged preservers. Initial contact with the indigenous humans did not go well: "The humans, already terrified by these apparitions, attacked the elves with their clubs". The Elves, in their contemporary form, are short and light with telepathic powers, longevity, and an especially low birth-rate. They also have a psychic romantic connection known as Recognition. In contrast there are the tall and bulky trolls, known for their metal-working skill. The highly intelligent, and enigmatic preservers, apart from winged flight, are also asexual and immortal. Finally, there are the humans, which are pretty much identical in culture and form as neolithic humans on Earth. 

The Elves that most player-characters start with are from the Wolfrider tribe. Their history comes from a shapeshifter who changed to wolf form to aid the survival of the tribe, and eventually was adopted by a wolf-pack and gave birth to half-wolves. Understandably, at least with some magical thinking, wolfrider thus have an empathic bond with their wolves.

The early issues of the comic series involves members of the Wolfrider tribe needing to flee their ancestral forest due to a conflict with the humans. Both helped and betrayed by the trolls, the Wolfriders eventually make their way into a desert where they encounter another elf tribe, the Sun Folk. Further attempts to find other elf tribes results in encounters with friendly humans (hashtag notallhumans), a conflict with another elf tribe (hashtag notallelves), eventual encounters with even more elf tribes, conflicts with trolls, and so on.

The original ElfQuest RPG left the story summary at issue 18 of the comic. This would be part of "Elfquest: The Original Quest" of twenty issues running from 1978 to 1984, plus a bonus issue of reviews, editorials, etc., which would then be followed by the eight-issue series "Siege at Blue Mountain" from 1986-1988, the nine-issue series "Kings of the Broken Wheel" (1988-1990) and then, in 1992, the ElfQuest series split into numerous multiple concurrent series, until 1996 when the lines were merged into a monthly anthology with multiple storylines, along with mini-series and one-off issues, with new comics, various reprints, and novelisations following.

As indicated the ElfQuest RPG came in quite early in the piece with the ElfQuest RPG being released as a boxed set in 1984 and consisting of a 72p "Elfbook" and a 32p "Worldbook". The Elfbook introduced the world, the character generation process, the game system, the skills and magic systems, combat and hunting, and several pages of other tribes and folk. The Worldbook consists of information about hazards, flora and fauna, and three scenarios. The boxed set also came with an A2 map of the regions of the comics to that point, and a 32p booklet of character sheets with elf and trolls outlines.

An "ElfQuest Companion", by numerous authors (Pini, Cerritelli, Okamoto, Petersen, Perrin), would be released in 1985, consisting of various characters, errata and elaborations, elf names (quite literal), elaborations on chacter design, a very interesting article on wolf ecology by Sandy Petersen, the Wolfhaven holt, and two scenarios. Steve Perrin wrote an afterward with the explicit idea of using a longer-term campaign to bring the various Elves tribes together. Also in 1985, Chaosium would release "The Sea Elves" culture book by Elizabeth Cerritelli. At 48p it includes cultural and character generation notes, the setting of the islands, sea elf magic, a bestiary, and three scenarios. Finally, in 1987, a 40p book of linked adventures under the title "Elf War" would be released, with two substantial adventures written by Elizabeth Cerritelli and Sandy Petersen. A second edition of the game, published as a single paperback book, was released in 1989 which effectively combined the first edition with content from the companion. 

In September 2024 Chaosium announced with Wendy and Richard Pini that the classic RPG would be re-released and a Kickstarter backed by over 2190 people saw the release of a remastered 40th Anniversary boxed set of the ElfQuest RPG. The new Deluxe edition added new creatures, new characters, and new lands from developments in the comic series. In addition there was a new world map, a gamemaster screen, an ElfQuest dice set, figures, and more. However, the rule system was the same as the original edition which is, of course, exactly what Chaosium said they were doing. 

This is both a problem and a benefit. It is a benefit because, for the time, ElfQuest was a clear and relatively simple RPG, following the RuneQuest-BRP engine. It's a problem because it is far from simple according to contemporary tastes. Further, although Recognition was a substantial and impressive plot device for the time, it is written at a time when player-directed narrativist input was minimal, to say the least. The possibility for a GM-directed romance contrary to the will of the player is a blazing red flag and a reason why "X" cards were invented. Finally, whilst there is a strong sense of the ElfQuest narrative within the game system such as the Sending ability, Wolfrider and other tribal bonds, and of course Recognition. These are very big steps in the RPG world and certainly different to what was common at the time.

Improving ElfQuest is relatively painless. The relatively crunchy combat system can be sped up susbtantially by the optionally rules suggested by Sandy Petersen in the "Elf War" supplement. These included (as individual choices) (a) No strike ranks and acting on DEX (2) No hit locations, damage subtracted from total hit points (3) No criticals, impales, or fumbles (4) No parries or dodges and (5) Simply movement with a move and combat phases only. These are generally agreeable, although I prefer to use DEX as the equivalent of Strike Rank for physical actions (with "threaten parry" rules for long arms), INT for mental actions, and POW for magical or social. Hit locations are useful, sometimes, as well. For example characters specifically targetting vital but unarmed locations (e.g., -25% for the head, -50% for an eye, etc), especially given some particularly sizeable fauna. But the general idea of making combat more "comic-like" and less "SCA-like" is a sound one for the game and setting.

Recognition is a relatively easy fix as well. As a driving theme of the setting, it could be as detailed as Sanity in Call of Cthulhu, but a simple method is to invite player input in director stance contributing to the narrative. That is, the player and the GM can agree on a point of Recognition for narrative purposes. Or, if a slightly simulationist component is desired, a POW*5 can be added as well. Other Elven personality traits should be encouraged as well. The Longevity, Low Birth Rate, and physical frailty of Elves would imply that they are supremely cautious about mortal conflicts even in such a dangerous neolithic environment. This is more of a trope for NPCs, as PCs are overconfident protagonists to the point of being foolhardy, but can be emphasised every step of the way with an adage "An Elf lost is an Elf lost forever".

Bond beasts are a very significant part of Elf personality. Wolfriders should be wolf-like, aggressive and feral. Wave-riders should be playful, Gliders individualistic and far-sighted etc. The general social formation is likewise influential; Elves are at a neolithic level of technological development, and their social mores reflect that. They have "elders" rather than chiefs, they have lore and conventions, rather than laws. The metal-working trolls and human herders and farmers have more of an early traditional society with chiefdoms; they will have a greater level of social stratification, "chiefs" rather than "elders" and so forth. The differences in social formations leads to some interesting narrative challenges; for example in Elf War, the Plains Elves considered herd animals to be common property, whereas the Humans goatherders invoke private property rights. 

Apart from conflicts and challenges between the various species a developing theme in the comics and one highlighted by Steve Perrin in The ElfQuest Companion is to bring the Elf tribes together. Of course, discovering other Elf tribes is interesting in its own right, but it is strengthened by providing additional impetus. Resource conflicts, environmental issues, and other external threats are a blunt instrument, but they can also invoke the internal differences. It provides a broader social narrative that is far advanced from aimlessly travelling from one adventure to another.

This article has covered the history of ElfQuest, a review of the roleplaying game associated with the comic series, and an exploration of common themes. Finally, a current ElfQuest campaign is being run through the RPG Review Cooperative and a github repository for characters, events, and programs is being generated, including a copy of this article. It is located at https://github.com/rpgreview/ElfQuest 
